Oh, Chrissy, please. Thank you. Okay.
Alright. Nice to meet you Chrissy.
My name is Greg Fleming.
I'm the, uh, acting chair of the committee today.
And to my, to my left, I have Phil Twyford,
and then the camera just zooms around.
Got City of Wade Brown with us as well.
Uh, and, um, uh, one other colleague, BOLO Garcia, may, may,
may be joining us momentarily.
Um, so we've got, uh,
20 minutes in total for the, the hearing.
That's 10 minutes for you.
And then 10 minutes from,
for the officials from the Ministry of Health.
Um, what we, um, tend to do in this, uh, in this committee,
um, because we're a small number of members and
because of the nature of the conversations we have, is tend
to have, um, a little bit more of a round table discussion.
Uh, so we will still give you your full 10 minutes,
but I'll invite the, uh, the officials up
to the table if they'd like to.
Um, and that way,
or you, you can, you can stay seated if you like.
It's just a, uh, we're wanting to set the scene for,
hopefully at the end of this, there'll be an opportunity
for you guys to actually interact directly with,
with Chrissy, we've found in the past that's a,
uh, a better way of engaging.
So, um, so Chrissy, we'll start with you.
You've got, um, 10 minutes.
You can take your, uh, your submission as read, um, uh,
and draw our attention to some of those, uh,
specific issues, and then allow time for, for questions.
So you've got a copy of my petition.
I wasn't gonna go through it 'cause you've already got it.
Um, if that's okay.
Brilliant. Okay. Well, in that case, we will, uh,
open it straight up to, um, members' questions.
Oh, no, I was gonna go through,
what I was gonna do though is to, um, ask you
what questions you have first,
but I also wanted time to go through my story.
'cause I think stories are quite powerful. Um, absolutely.
And I haven't had a chance to tell my story.
Um, and then I'm, I'm curious about some of the gaps
that I've found across government.
Yeah. So maybe if you guys have some questions first,
then I could answer them, um,
and then I could share my story with you or,
Um, yes, that'd be great.
So can I, I'll just, um, kick off first of all, uh, just
to say, first of all, congratulations on your submission.
Um, I've been on this committee now for over a year
and a half, and that would be one of the most succinct, uh,
yet comprehensive petitions I've encountered.
So just really appreciate the, um, the amount
of information you were able to get into, into those pages.
Um, and so, yeah, um, thank you,
thank, thank you very much for that.
I, I would actually really appreciate, um, up to you guys.
I really appreciate hearing your story because,
because your submission was so comprehensive, I was keen
to hear your story more.
And, and if it's okay, not, not just the story in terms of
what you endured, which I'm incredibly sorry to to hear
that, but what happened in terms
of your interactions with the council?
Yeah. And then with the, with the, um, uh, the health
and Disability Commission as well,
because clearly the, the, um,
if I'm reading your submission correctly, the systems
that we currently have that are set up
to address issues like this appear to,
in your instance, have failed.
Yeah. Yeah. And I think, I think
that's probably a good summary of what I experienced.
Um, so what I was going to,
so on the 23rd of January, I'm just gonna read it here.
I went through, um, the second treatment
of laser tattoo removals, um, from my, both my forearms.
And then the next day I removed the bandages
after they had said that I should remove them by,
and they,
I had more blisters than I had the first treatment.
So I'm sitting, so I'm like, okay, you know,
this is what it is.
Within a couple of hours, I was in excruciating pain
and it was like my, I could feel my bones.
Um, and then I could see that the path,
the blisters had rapidly increased this.
So I called the Healthline and they advised me to see my gp.
Um, and I emailed the clinic, and the clinic phoned me.
Um, I emailed them out of courtesy.
I wasn't wanting any financial gains, um, from them,
um, though the beauty clinic phoned me.
And, uh, what I was concerned about was she
advised me pretty quickly that she wouldn't pay for my
after treatment costs.
And I wasn't requesting this.
I was also in excruciating pain.
Um, so her bedside matter manner wasn't, um, to me
that wasn't very good,
but there was no mention of going to the er.
There was no mention of calling my gp.
There's no mention at the very least
of contacting the helpline.
And I think that alarmed me
because that was also, there was no mention
of this in the aftercare instructions from them as well.
So this is a point that I'll make at the end.
Um, and it is relating to the, um, upper Hut city council.
So I phoned the GP gun appointment that day.
Uh, she was assessing whether I should go to ER
and get some IV antibiotics,
and that she decided that
she'd given me the strongest antibiotics that I should,
um, take at that time.
And I was prescribed a very strong antihistamine.
So over the weekend, it was disgusting.
Um, and I was in, I was in pain
and I'm a healthy 45-year-old woman.
Like, I'm, I'm pretty, you know, I'm pretty fit ish.
I, I don't drink, I don't smoke.
I don't do anything like that.
Um, so I take pretty good care of my body,
and I have not experienced this before.
Um, my husband had gone to the pharmacy over the weekend,
um, got an appointment for me
to see the nurse on the Monday, got a bunch of bandages.
Monday, 9:00 AM I went to the nurse
and I was advised to go to the ER immediately at, as soon
as I got to the er, I, when I left,
I saw the same people in the waiting room.
So I was expedited pretty quickly.
Um, the Burns team saw me,
including the nurse
and the doctor had oversight over my treatment.
And then I went through more pain
and I had all the skin removed
and to, to clear out all of the fluid.
And then she, she wiped my arms.
Um, so it was like, Ross egg, it's really gross.
And here I am kind of freaking out.
I don't know what my arms are gonna look like after this.
Um, and you know, there was also mention
that if had I not had the blisters removed,
even though the aftercare instruction said,
don't touch the blisters, that I would've been prone to, um,
more serious infections as well as, um,
it actually impacts the, the healing.
So that's a concern for me.
Um, so I got some silver bandages put on,
and then I called the media
because I thought this is, this is not okay, this is,
this is a medical treatment.
Um, already I'm at the point
that I'm not even getting proper medical care at this point.
Um, well, I am for the medical team,
but not from the beauty clinic.
They hadn't advised me to seek medical treatment.
And here I am going, you know, pardon my French,
but WTF that's when I also contact.
That week I took off.
I worked for myself, so I wasn't paid for that, which is,
um, you know, it, it's, it was disappointing,
but that's not what I was concerned about.
Um, I contacted the Ministry of Health.
I contacted WorkSafe. Um, who else did I contact?
I contacted, um, well,
my local mp, I know
I contacted the Beauty Association, the Ministry
of Health advised that it was medical.
So this fell under, I think, beauty therapies.
And this was something to talk to my local counsel about.
Um, WorkSafe said that, you know,
there wasn't anything that they could do.
That's fine. Um, health
and Disability Commission advised me
that this was also, uh, not medical.
This was a beauty treatment.
Um, however, what I was concerned about was the, um,
magnitude of my experience
and, um, that it fell into health
because the advice that I got from beauty
was, um, incorrect.
I could have been prone to, um, you know, some scarring
and infection that's, that's not okay.
Um, the Hut City Council did an investigation.
Um, they, interestingly,
they received my notes from the Health
and Disability Commission.
Um, I'm a counselor. I know the Privacy Act.
I was quite concerned about that as well without my consent.
Um, the Upper Hut City Council advised
that they actually diagnosed
and said that what I experienced was an adverse reaction,
not burn, but it, they were burns.
I experienced burn. I have medical, um,
documentation saying they were burned.
So I'm, in my opinion, I find
that there's some massive gaps.
Um, I found it ironic that the Upper Hot City Council, um,
actually contacted the Health and Disability Commission,
and they were part of the investigation when they advised
to me that the, that isn't their jurisdiction.
Um, I found it interesting as well that, um, yeah,
that I just, for me, there was quite a confusing event, um,
to be in the middle of
because, um, in my mind, this is health, this isn't beauty.
Um, the beauty Association advised me that they're working
and lobbying with the government.
Um, so they didn't wanna get involved with, um,
this, and that's fine.
But I do think this is quite economically driven as well.
Um, from my experience, um, with the beauty clinic
and pointing right to cost, I think
that is a conflict of interest as well.
So, yeah. So that's kind of, that's my experience.
Um, yeah,
the Upper Hut City Council didn't pick up on the aftercare
instructions as well, um, that I was, that I was given.
They said that they followed all the procedures
that they needed to follow.
And I don't, I don't know that that's true
because of my experience.
Okay. Um, that is quite an experience. Chrissy.
Um, thank you very much for sharing that detail with us.
I might, um, just with an eye on the time,
I might now invite the, uh, ministry of Health officials
to come and speak so that, um, and then
after that we can, we can, uh,
consolidate all our questions at that point, if that's okay?
Yep.
Uh, Kiara, um, so I'm Kiski.
I manage a public health policy team,
and, uh, Kiara, Kevin Smith, the Chief Regulatory Officer.
Welcome. Thanks. Um, thank you Chair.
Um, I know that we've already provided a written commentary
to the committee, but happy
to read some remarks of useful to you.
Yep. Great. Thank you. Um, so firstly, just want to yeah.
Acknowledge, um, the harm that Chrissy has experienced, um,
and that the yeah, that, that was quite a story
and, um, very distressing.
I can imagine. So we completely understand why she has, um,
concern and interest about regulation in this area.
Um, so we do acknowledge that tattoo removal,
laser tattoo removal has the potential to cause notable harm
to an individual, but we've got limited evidence
about the scale of the problem.
Um, so the New Zealand Institute
of Environmental Health examined some a CC claims data,
and that reported an average of five claims per year
for harm from tattoo removal between 2018 and 2023.
Is that five? Five? Yep.
Um, and if it's helpful, um, a comparison.
So there was an average
of 434 claims per year over the same period
for harm resulting from tattooing
and 329 claims per year for harm resulting from body pie.
And now completely acknowledging that, um,
there could well be under reporting.
So, um, that figure is not necessarily a, an official, um,
record of the harms caused by Lance TA removal.
Um, so in regards to kind of regulation
of the appearance industries, including TA removal, um,
we don't have a national framework for regulation
of appearance enhance and services.
Um, and there are a number of government agencies
that do have roles in various, um, components.
Um, and much of the appearance industry are subject
to voluntary self-regulation.
Um, we do have, um,
so artificial UV tanning is regulated under
part five of the Health Act.
So it shows you there are some components, um, that are,
but not specifically tattoo removal.
Um, we're aware that there are some councils
that do have bylaws mm-hmm.
Um, in the space. And, um,
Chrissy's already talked about upper Heart City Council.
Also, we like, uh, Auckland Council had a so 2013 health
and hygiene bylaw that requires
that laser-based tattoo removal operators, um,
must have things like specific training,
display their qualifications,
maintain control treatment environments,
and use PPE, um, protective equipment.
Um, and secure informed consent from clients
before commence some treatment.
But we don't have anything consistent at a national level.
Um, we have looked at whether the Health Practitioner's
Competency Assurance Act could have been a viable option
for regulation of the
professionals involved in this industry.
Um, but most of them don't fall within the scope of the act
because they're not a health service
and they don't involve health professionals.
Um, and I guess, yeah, the other makers, um,
that the government is interested in has a, a focus
around proportionate regulation, which means ensuring
that regulation only occurs
where there are no less restrictive ways to manage the risk,
and then only to the extent necessary to address that risk.
And we would note recently the repeal
of regulations relating to head and barbering in the space.
Um, and that followed a review that found
that those regulations were not an efficient
or effective, um, intervention.
Um, but yeah, we do acknowledge that, um,
that Chrissy's experience does, does show
that some services in this area do come with a risk
of harm to individuals.
We're just not clear that the overall level of risk
to the public wants regulatory
intervention by the government.
Um, full regulation
of the appearance industries would require extensive policy
work, public consultation, legislative change,
and the establishment of new regulatory systems.
Um, and obviously we'd need to balance
that against other government priorities, um,
and health system priorities.
Um, and then I guess the general question about whether
health led regulation would be appropriate, given
that most appearance industry services are not health
services or directed delivered by health professionals.
Again, acknowledging s
'cause there's point that often consequences do fall in the
health space, um,
but the services themselves are not directly health related.
Mm-hmm. Um,
and then I, I suppose the other option is strengthening
that system, self-regulation.
So in the absence of national regulation,
whether there's further options for the industry itself
to self-regulate
or look at options for more consistency across councils, um,
for regulation by councils, um, more public
and awareness of consumer rights, um,
and things that consumers should be looking
for when they use these services.
Um, so yeah. Thank you.
Happy to leave it there unless you wanted to add anything.
Great. Thank you very much. Over to questions.
Mm. I mean, I've got one to kick off.
I just didn't wanna dominate. Did
You wanna, Uh, just a small question.
Um, I hear what you, I I imagine that
if there's under reporting in one
of the areas you've mentioned there would be similar under
reporting in the other areas.
So when you mentioned I think more than 500 issues with
Turing, um, is there an argument
that looking at the range of services
and at least requiring some display
of people's rights
or what they can do to follow up might be, um,
like at the mild end of, uh,
because I think some people have no idea
that there could be these results.
Mm-hmm. Um, I just wonder if there's something
that's not a full regulation,
but would be, um, we could even encourage councils
to make sure that places offering this sort of services
do at least display, um, potential side effects.
And what you can do if you've experienced it, it's not
as far as the petitioner would like,
but it might be something. Mm.
Thought I thought some of that would come under kind
of general consumer protections. Um, keeping,
Uh, but that's the, I guess the alternate
to national is the local, which is the local bodies,
and there's no, there's nothing stopping us
or anyone promoting a better way
of local government signaling risks
and issues for consumers.
Uh, and some do.
Um, and some councils are better renowned at
their bylaws in this space.
Um, so there's the opportunity to share a better form
of best practice in terms of consumer information.
Mm-hmm. I'm not, um, HPCA Acts 2003,
you talking there about the five restricted activities,
can you just clarify for me that, um, one
of those five activities is, uh, on the, uh,
surgical operating procedures
below the marginal on the surface of the skin?
So does that, I wasn't, I wasn't sure when I read that you,
are you saying that, that, that that is applicable in this,
in the, in the place of tattoos, both applied and removal?
No. So it's not applicable.
Um, I, I know the bit you're referring to,
I'm not the expert in it certainly could come away
and provide you with more information on that,
but it is, so yeah, there are restricted activities about,
um, it's going to a certain depth of the skin,
but tattering would not go at that depth,
that it becomes a restricted activity under the HPCA.
But I'm happy to come back
with the further details on that if useful.
So does that, I mean, I've read some cases, um,
in the last year or two where, um, where other, um,
skin treatments, um, Botox fills, that sort of things
that have, have gone pretty pear shaped as well.
Mm. Are they, are they in the same category as
so they're not covered either.
Yep. Either though, even though they,
they're clearly penetrating the skin.
Yeah. It, it's not just penetrate the skin, it's
to a particular depth side.
Right. It's not just, um, if it's at a superficial,
a reasonably superficial level, it's not covered.
It's, it's more to cover kind of, um, of surgical,
um, activities.
Okay. Yep. Wow.
So, so really we've never had, uh, regulation
of this area in terms of, gosh,
it's fascinating in the country in which
application is such a major thing.
There's never been, gosh. Which,
I mean, a lot of this apparent stuff is quite new,
relatively new, you know, um, well, I don't dunno how long
Tops been Yeah. Why I
made reference Tom. That's been around a little while.
Yeah. Yeah. Mm-hmm. Wow. Okay. Other questions?
Yeah, I was probably about the judgment, um,
that you make about, uh,
so there were five cases over
a year, was that what you said?
Yeah, uh, five Five cases.
Average of five cases per year. Yep.
Yeah. Which on, you know, um, on the face
of it sounds like a, a low number,
but I wonder if, um, how we might compare that to other,
um, analogous activities
and get a sense of, you know,
get some perspective really on,
and also, I guess it depends how you choose to frame
or groups the sort of activity that we're talking about,
if it's just laser removal of tattoos
or are there, um, if we looked at the full range of
skin pieing appearance treatments,
what would the picture look like?
Yeah, yep. Um,
The report by the New Zealand Institute
of Primary Health Health, um, that covers quite a lot
of the a CC analysis.
Yep. And I think that does come into still a low number,
a low cost.
Mm. And all of these things factor in
the cost of regulation.
Yep. Um, ultimately in priorities, which part
of the system do we end that energy to fix?
Mm. Um, yeah.
It just hasn't got to that state where the right evidence
that we've got accessible to um, really pushes it through.
Yeah. So in that sort of, uh, if there's a hierarchy
of regulation, um, what, what are the options if,
if within this framework, it one judge is that, um,
this is less of a, less
of a priority than many other things.
Do we just leave it completely unregulated?
Well, you, you do step down from national to local
to self-regulation.
Yeah. And, um, local can work,
but again, it could, you run the risk of different, um,
protection in place in different parts of the country.
Yeah. When you go not at all, sorry,
or not at all, or not at all.
And then when you go to self-regulation, then you,
and that works best when an industry is
quite cohesive and keen.
Um, and then they can self-support
and stand up their own best practice.
And that takes an industry sort of momentum
and critical weight to get to that point.
But it can be very valid
'cause you can then advertise with the new industry, say,
I member this body, we hold ourselves
to account high standards, come and get your services here.
Um, if you, if you don't see the sign on the window,
then they're not a member of the industry association.
They don't adhere to standards.
So there are, there are possibilities in there
that can work in some circumstances.
Mm-hmm.
May I ask about, uh, the standards New Zealand, um,
uh, standard for safe use of lasers and dead slide sources.
But I understanding it is, it applies only
to healthcare situations.
Wouldn't that be the closest? Um,
Uh, I think we come unstuck in a number of places
to the definition of health services
and the reason for the, you know, the, the intent
of the work and that's where the HPCA falls away in terms
of the actual profession.
Uh, and some aspects of other things
that Claire was mentioning as well.
That's the, you know, the definition of health
and that's where Chrissy came unstuck with the hd.
Yeah. See around, well that's not our grievance,
that's the consequences are health related,
but the service, the genesis from it, the service
that it's not, is not,
that's the distinction which I think causes issues.
I know it sounds, I don't mean to be trivial here,
but it was a bit like a rafting, commercial rafting company.
If it all goes wrong, it has health consequences,
but it's not providing a health service.
That's, that's the way you extrapolate
To court to make the clearer. Yeah.
Um, Chrisy, just as
before we wrap up, do you have, uh, do you have a question
that you want to wanna pose to the, um, health officials?
I do have some questions.
I was, thank you for the opportunity.
I was wondering how did you come to the statistics?
Does that include declined claims?
Um, I think m likely, so I think, yeah, you're right.
So this is, um, tho those, uh, from an, um,
the industry body based on a CC data.
So one, it will require people placing the claim with a CC
and many, I dunno if you did.
And many people possibly won't do claim through a CC
and I suspect it will be based on accepted claims.
Accepted claims. Okay. Okay. Okay. Yeah.
And I'm curious, um, have you looked at international, um,
I'm sure you've looked at how other countries
regulate how to removal?
I don't. Um, That's a
Good question. Yes.
I can't recall if we have specific, we've looked at,
um, through the hairdresser barbering review, we did look at
how, um, other countries have taken approaches
to regulating, um, appearance based industries.
I know that, um, say in Western Australia,
they have quite a general public health regulation.
Um, so not sort of specific to a certain service,
but a more board based approach, which is probably, um, uh,
not unreasonable way to go.
Um, yeah,
Yeah. They have states,
so states look at it differently.
I know that in America, like I'm Canadian,
but I do know in America they have medical oversight.
Could that be something, I'm a counselor,
so I have a clinical supervisor
and I have an association that I'm regulated by.
Could that be something that you might look at,
is medical oversight and clinical supervision?
I guess to do that would've to go, that would be
through the Health Practitioner's Competency Assurance Act.
And like we've already said, because it's not, uh,
health services such or, or necessarily
provided by health practitioners, um,
it wouldn't readily fall under the, the guise of
that regulatory regime.
Um, and I think outside of that, it would still come down
to, um, consideration of, um, the,
the benefits of doing that
and whether there's a level of risk that warrants, um,
that kind of involvement
that would take from the medical
professionals or another group.
It's just interesting that we have the same human bodies,
but different countries regulate our
human bodies differently.
Um, to me this is a medical issue,
but thank you for my, um, questions. Appreciate it.
Thank you Chrisy very much.
And thank you again, um, for the thoughtfulness
and the completeness of your petition.
Thank you very much. You too.
For, for the comprehensiveness of your engagement as well.
And look forward to, um, the report,
uh, that'll flow from it.
Cheers. Thank you. Thanks Chrisy.
You Chris.
Oh, Chris, Nice to meet you in
Person. Thank
you.
Okay, so we now need to now move to item number six
Else here for this.
So fire emergency New Zealand. Does that, so, okay, great.
Excellent. Welcome. Okay, Christian,
we've seen how, how this goes.
Now is this your first time before a select committee?
Second. Second. Excellent.
Oh, you'll be well experienced then. Yeah.
So as I say, uh, same thing applies.
You can take your, your, um, uh, submissions as read, uh,
you've got 10 minutes and we'll go into some question time.
And then after that we'll see whether at end we can
facilitate, um, question.
I've got about three minutes to speak
and then I'll just open the floor of questions.
Great. Thank you very much. Okay.
Um, regarding my petition to urge the government
to release, uh, in incident statistics held
by fire emergency in New Zealand for the last 30 years,
I'd like to thank the petition for its invitation
to speak the 43 SFP fire engineers who signed the petition
and my employer Kirk Roberts Consulting
for allowing me the time off work to speak on this matter
fence have been collecting emergency incident incident
statistics for over 30 years on matters such
as structural bias, hazardous sub, hazardous substances,
emergencies, and other emergencies
that can affect every person in New Zealand.
The statistical database is considerable
and impressive, yet is not yet,
it is not publicly available to review.
Part of the motivation
for this petition came from my recently re uh,
recently completed research at the University of Canterbury
where it was clear that the profession
of fire engineering was not utilizing emergency incident
statistics to assist decision making, whether it be
for a single project or as an informative tool for
regarding the content of fire safety secondary legislation.
Instead, a more speculative approach is often adopted,
which reduces the design choices available
for the construction industry.
For example, there have been well publicized,
well-publicized delays in obtaining hospital building
consents over fire engineering matters despite no empirical
evidence that there is a fire safety
problem with our hospitals.
Speaking more broadly to that point,
I actually looked at statistics right across Australasia
and to look at which jurisdictions 'cause each state
and territory of Australia and each
and New Zealand under their laws, uh,
have their own fire safety
and emergency response generally laws, who's doing it best,
who's more efficient and who is deficient?
And you need statistics to get that data.
It's called in difference in different studies
and it was very difficult
and I didn't get everything I wanted,
but very important for the economy as a whole.
'cause emergencies are part of our,
our economic cost to the country.
The last time FES proactively released statist, uh,
detailed statistical data was in 2014.
Since then, no further detailed proactive, uh,
public disclosures have been made.
I believe that FE should release this data save
for the removal of personal information, other, uh,
sensitive data so that anyone can study the efficacy
of New Zealand's ability to respond to emergencies.
This can only facilitate better decision making in, in,
in developing policy, holding the executive to account
and ensuring consistency with cabinets.
2011 minute of decision regarding the declaration of
of open and transparent government.
The question before, the committee also raises an important
constitutional question about governments proactively making
information held by the executive available.
New Zealand is regarded as one
of the most transparent countries globally
and decisions to release emergency incidents.
Statistics should be consistent with New Zealand's ambition
to maintain its reputation as a transparent country.
Conversely, not releasing this information, in my opinion,
would not be consistent with cabinet's.
2011 minute of decision.
However, perhaps most importantly,
New Zealand is exposed more hazards than many other
countries, including the Trans Alpine Fault,
the Wellington fault, and the Quranic subduction zone
seismic events in these geogra geo,
in these geologically active areas will occur
and will be catastrophic.
The scrutiny of emergency incident statistics allows anyone
to examine New Zealand's preparedness
for emergency response in greater detail
than its currently possible.
Thank you. Welcome questions now.
Thank you. Um, yeah, you, you, you can,
I think it might be a question of procedure.
Um, I'm sit, normally I'm not on the petitions committee,
so I usually sit on the Governance
and administration committee, which covers this area.
Mm-hmm. And my, I guess my question might be to you,
the staff or yourself, um, about, um,
the opportunity to raise this with the committee
that normally looks at FS and NEMA
and all of those sorts of things.
And presumably you organize the warning last night,
this morning in advance of you coming in here.
Sorry. You you organized a wonderful warning to everybody.
I didn't hear it. No, I know.
No, but I'm just saying you might reminded us
of the Oh, okay.
Thank you. Um, emergencies, I'm sure it wasn't yourself
that, um, it was worth thinking about.
Yeah, yeah. No, absolutely.
One of the things that can, that can flow from,
from this is recommendations
to other committees to, to consider things.
So, yeah. Um,
but the question I've just got, you've, um,
no doubt seen the written submission from, um,
from s themselves.
Yes, I have. Yes. Can I invite you to, to, to speak to
that just in, in particular in terms of what they're saying,
what data is available and,
and how that falls short,
obviously in your view of what it's that you're seeking.
Okay. Basically a few things.
One, they say that there's, um, they argue that it,
it requires clarifying and,
and, uh, refining and things like that.
My view is it's official information regardless
of the way it's currently stored and
therefore can be released under the OIA
and should be released just in, in raw data form
for anybody to fill, uh, uh, analyze as as they want to.
Yeah, that's a key thing for me.
And, uh, in Queensland is
got a stellar example of where every year they release all
of the incident statistics.
They all have a similar database computer model
because it's specialized computer software.
Mm. I can't remember the name of the company
that produces it, but they, um,
they all goes into basically a spreadsheet.
You can just delete the columns of
where there's personal information
and then just put it on the website.
And so when I was dealing with Queensland Fire,
Queensland Fire Department,
'cause they actually fell behind in their release of it.
'cause I was chasing up about five years behind.
I gave them a quiet nudge
and I said, put it back on, put it on the website please.
And they did it in the space of a, of a few days.
So the data can be held. It, it is there empirically.
I've made many OAS to F
and it's always been helpful in that regard.
But my view is I should be able to get, get it.
I know all 162 data fields
and I, there's all sorts
of fastened very important questions that we need, uh,
rather than wait 20 days or whatever it may be,
and then find out what, what the answer is.
Okay. Thank you.
I guess we'll, um, yeah, this, this makes me, um,
an anticipate eagerly that, um, things, um, given
that you are the chief data and analytics officer, correct?
Yeah. Um, is that, uh, members,
do you have specific questions, Chris?
Yeah, why don't you, is that okay for you to come forward
because this, and I think at this stage the conversation
can become quite constructive.
Okay.
Thank you. Nice to meet you. Please meet.
Yeah. So Hamish, can I ask you to, to give, um,
whatever it was that you had prepared?
Yeah. And then, yeah.
'cause I'm imagining that the questions we're about
to dive into now will actually be
for the two of you, so Yeah.
Yeah. No pleasure. And uh, thank you very much
for, for having me here today.
Um, I think firstly we are really supportive
of the petition in terms
of the requesting to be transparent.
And I think as Christian's pointed out, we do do a lot Yeah.
Uh, in terms of transparency.
But the OIA process, uh,
and there's a couple of notes about some more recent stuff
that we've put out to international bodies
that allows school comparison across country.
So there are things that we are doing in that regard.
Probably The couple of things, um,
that I would wanna pick up on is a little bit of the work
that we're doing a, in our data.
So Fins, uh, as you'll be aware,
came together in 2017 old systems.
We're actually modernizing all of our data management
and that's an important consideration
that we can come into in a little bit detail bit.
Um, the other one, um,
and it draws a little bit of comparison to Queenstown,
we do have a very specific privacy consideration in
New Zealand that's not just about private information.
Uh, the privacy commissioner in 2017 said any location
information about an incident
is considered private information.
Hmm. So it's not as simple as taking out names.
We've gotta take out addresses, locations,
and we've gotta think about how we share that.
'cause identifiably what sort of aggregation level?
So the, the point around data cleansing
and management not being, uh,
insignificant is, is inaccurate.
And that's different. Quite lot of that's different from
Queensland's privacy require very much.
Yep, yep. We've got different privacy laws, right.
Um, that apply between the two states.
That being said, there is still more that we could do
and release and we have indicated in, in our response that
that is exactly what we are working to towards.
I understand that people don't like the language working
towards, but we are more than happy to have and bring you in
and show you what we're doing and,
and give you an example of how we're trying
to manage our data more effectively and,
and the station management system for context that
that is 648 tables with
however many columns and with millions
and millions of rows of data.
And to ensure that we don't break privacy rules,
we've gotta look at that information
and we are trying to do things that modernize that in terms
of using some AI features
and the like to help speed up that process.
'cause we are up for putting more information.
We are just not there from a data management perspective.
Mm-hmm. And we do have a very specific
privacy consideration.
So that'd be probably the two,
probably the two key points I'd like to,
to highlight to the committee.
Thank you. That's really helpful.
Questions from members, first
Of all, you go, um, the,
I can understand the volume and the pri privacy issues.
Um, do you have a, like a timeline
or uh, a target that you're working towards, uh, in terms
of, um, being enabled
by technology to Yeah.
Yeah. So as of this point in time,
we are currently looking at
what we call ingesting our data into our modern data
platform, which is a, a new environment which is secure.
That is, we've got a project plan in front of us.
We have a 12 month project to bring that data
into the new system and engineer it.
And that means getting it in a state
where we know what the data is.
We, we apply what's called metadata,
so it helps us describe what's in there.
Mm-hmm. That is a 12 month program of work. Wow.
Doesn't mean Christian might have to wait 12 months
'cause different data gets done at different timeframes.
But that's, that's, that's the piece of work we have
and that's connected with other large system migrations,
including our human resource system that connects with it
and that sort sort of thing.
But we're very happy to be very transparent about our work
program that we're undertaking in the right,
in the area of data management.
That's very, very happy to do that
and happy to show you,
bring you in and show you what we're doing.
That's do an online meeting, whatever suit for
that perspective so it can be transparent.
Thank you. Questions. Um, well, just an observation.
I, if the, um, if the data, if there are problems
with the data in terms of, um, uh, information
that might make it, you know, problematic to interpret or
or so on, then that raises the question of
how you are using the data.
Um, so I, so there's that,
but on the face of it, I, I can't see that, um,
you can sustain for very long, um, uh,
the expectation under the normal principles of,
of transparency and openness, um, that,
that government's supposed to operate by on the basis of,
uh, that you haven't sorted out the
privacy Act implications. So it's about
Sorting out probably point of clarification.
Yeah. Um, we understand the privacy act implications.
Mm-hmm. Um, what it basically means is
that we've gotta look across our dataset,
which includes a lot of open data fields
Yeah. And
anything that references things like an
address or a location. No,
I understood. You've gotta scrape all
that out. I understood that
that's your responsibility.
Yes. Oh, absolutely. So I, yeah, I'm just saying, I,
I don't think your position can be sustained for very
Long. No, I would agree.
And Yeah, it's not, that's my,
that's my personal opinion anyway.
If any, if if nothing else then um, I can write you.
Chris, do you have, I mean, it sounds like you've got an
open invitation here to dialogue
With them. Oh,
I grateful for that.
Thank you very much. Yeah. Um,
and I do understand the privacy side of things.
Yeah. My experience with, uh, spreadsheets is, um,
things can move faster, not slower.
Yeah. So I'm keen to see very soon, um, just as a highlight,
it was, they used to release really good data back up until
around 2014 and it stopped.
And a lot of people in the industry was disappointed to see
that information, annual statistical report, which is good.
140 odd pages. Right. They just stop from being released.
So that's in a spreadsheet. I know.
I haven't seen what they've got,
but I know, I know spreadsheets,
I know S-P-S-S-F-I-B-M software and all the rest of it.
And it just, there is one the inefficiency side of law
where we get our policy wrong right.
From statute below. Right.
And we got inefficiencies that permeate into the economy
and then we've got preparedness for disaster.
And this morning in Russia I think is a good example
of we've got three of those in this country.
Are we ready for it? The emergency statistics
are helpful in looking at these things. Sure.
Yeah. So can I just
before we come to you, Hamish, is do you know
what changed in 2014? My question?
Uh, no, actually I,
I've been at Fins for, for three years.
I haven't, I don't know what that change was.
I know that the, the privacy commission finding,
which is one of their only very specific findings
that they've released, um, was an advisory opinion in 2017.
Yeah. Um, we attempted then to be able to publish,
uh, statistics.
Mm-hmm. And we were advised at that point in time that
that was private information and we could not release that.
And that's been an opinion that's been held. Okay.
Subsequent, but I wouldn't know,
I don't know if we were publishing the report that I'm aware
of the one that Christian's, uh, referencing
that wasn't a regular publication as far as I'm aware.
It was three in a row. Yeah. Approximately three in
A row and then it ceased
and it was one of the most comprehensive across Australasia.
Okay. And then it ceased.
Right. What I would like to request
and um, is that we send the petition,
the information of the petition, not necessarily
as a petition, the responses
and the supplementary to governance
and administration for their consideration when they have
scrutiny of defense.
Mm-hmm. Um, if that would be, um, yeah. Helpful.
Yeah, absolutely. Well, I mean the, the report
that we write from here is presented to the house
and we can make sure that we draw that attention
to the GA so that they don't miss it.
Absolutely. Right. Yep.
Um, good. Great.
Oh, in that case we'll draw it to close.
Thank you very much. Nice to meet you
Christian. Thank you. Much
Time much.
Yeah, thank You.